# Week 10 — CloudFormation Part 1

## Create an S3 bucket
**we creat an s3 bucket to contain all of our artifacts for CloudFormation**

```sh
aws s3 mk s3://cfn-bsharp
export CFN_BUCKET="cfn-bsharp"
gp env CFN_BUCKET="cfn-bsharp"
```

## Setting up CloudFormation

We create this CloudFormation template `aws/cfn/template.yaml` to create an ECS Cluster named "Bsharp" with Fargate as the capacity provider:

```yml
AWSTemplateFormatVersion: 2010-09-09
Description: |
  Setup ECS Cluster
Resources:
  ECSCluster: 
    Type: 'AWS::ECS::Cluster'
    Properties:
      ClusterName: Bsharp
      CapacityProviders:
        - FARGATE
```


## AWS CloudFormation Linter

Linter is a tool that validate AWS CloudFormation yaml/json templates against the [AWS CloudFormation Resource Specification](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/cfn-resource-specification.html) and additional
checks. Includes checking valid values for resource properties and best practices.

## AWS CloudFormation Guard 
**Validate Cloud Environments with Policy-as-Code**

AWS CloudFormation Guard is an open-source general-purpose policy-as-code evaluation tool. It provides developers with a simple-to-use, yet powerful and expressive domain-specific language (DSL) to define policies and enables developers to validate JSON- or YAML- formatted structured data with those policies. 


We add the installations in `.gitpod.yml`:

```yml
  - name: cfn
    before: |
      pip install cfn-lint
      cargo install cfn-guard
      gem install cfn-toml
```

## ECS Guard Rules

we add `aws/cfn/task-definition.guard`:

```
aws_ecs_cluster_configuration {
  rules = [
    {
      rule = "task_definition_encryption"
      description = "Ensure task definitions are encrypted"
      level = "error"
      action {
        type = "disallow"
        message = "Task definitions in the Amazon ECS cluster must be encrypted"
      }
      match {
        type = "ecs_task_definition"
        expression = "encrypt == false"
      }
    },
    {
      rule = "network_mode"
      description = "Ensure Fargate tasks use awsvpc network mode"
      level = "error"
      action {
        type = "disallow"
        message = "Fargate tasks in the Amazon ECS cluster must use awsvpc network mode"
      }
      match {
        type = "ecs_task_definition"
        expression = "network_mode != 'awsvpc'"
      }
    },
    {
      rule = "execution_role"
      description = "Ensure Fargate tasks have an execution role"
      level = "error"
      action {
        type = "disallow"
        message = "Fargate tasks in the Amazon ECS cluster must have an execution role"
      }
      match {
        type = "ecs_task_definition"
        expression = "execution_role == null"
      }
    },
  ]
}
```

## YAML tags
To be able to use !Ref and ! Sub tags in our tamplets we should go to `settings.json` and add the following tags
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference.html

```yml
{
    "yaml.customTags": [
        "!Base64 scalar",
        "!Cidr scalar",
        "!And sequence",
        "!Equals sequence",
        "!If sequence",
        "!Not sequence",
        "!Or sequence",
        "!Condition scalar",
        "!FindInMap sequence",
        "!GetAtt scalar",
        "!GetAtt sequence",
        "!GetAZs scalar",
        "!ImportValue scalar",
        "!Join sequence",
        "!Select sequence",
        "!Split sequence",
        "!Sub scalar",
        "!Transform mapping",
        "!Ref scalar",
    ]
}
```


## Setting up CloudFormation Networking Layer

We add `aws/cfn/networking/template.yaml`:<br>

This is a CloudFormation template for creating a VPC (Virtual Private Cloud) with base networking components. The template includes an internet gateway, a route table, and six subnets (three public and three private) that are explicitly associated with the route table. The public subnets are numbered 1 to 3, and the private subnets are numbered 1 to 3. The template allows the user to specify the VPC CIDR block, the availability zones for the subnets, and the CIDR blocks for the subnets.

We add `bin/cfn/networking-deploy`:<br> 
Which is deploying a CloudFormation stack using a template and a configuration file. It is also using cfn-lint to validate the CloudFormation template and cfn-toml to retrieve deployment parameters from the configuration file.

>chmod u+x bin/cfn/networking-deploy

#### CloudFormation toml

We install cfn-toml:

```sh
gem install cfn-toml
```

We add `aws/cfn/networking/config.toml`:

```sh
[deploy]
bucket = 'cfn-bsharp'
region = 'ca-central-1'
stack_name = 'CrdNet'
```


## Setting up CloudFormation Cluster Layer

We add `aws/cfn/cluster/template.yaml`:<br>

This is an AWS CloudFormation template that sets up the networking and cluster configuration to support Fargate containers. It creates an ECS Fargate Cluster, Application Load Balancer (ALB), ALB Security Group, HTTPS and HTTP Listeners, Frontend and Backend Target Groups, and other resources required for the configuration. It also includes various parameters that allow for customization of the configuration.

We add `bin/cfn/cluster-deploy` which deploys a CloudFormation template to create a stack using parameters extracted from a TOML config file. It sets the stack name, region, S3 bucket, and applies tags.

>chmod u+x bin/cfn/cluster-deploy


#### CloudFormation toml

We add `aws/cfn/cluster/config.toml`:

```sh
[deploy]
bucket = 'cfn-bsharp'
region = 'ca-central-1'
stack_name = 'CrdCluster'

[parameters]
CertificateArn = 'arn:aws:acm:ca-central-1:354592008288:certificate/0405ee49-b14e-4cd6-8730-4fb8476bae3f'
NetworkingStack = 'CrdNet'
```


## Setting up CloudFormation Service Layer

We add `aws/cfn/service/template.yaml`:

We use this template for deploying a Fargate service with an ECS cluster. It sets up networking components such as VPC, subnets, and an Application Load Balancer. The template also includes several parameters for configuring the service, including container port, CPU and memory allocation, task family name, and environment variables. Finally, the resources section defines a Fargate service and a task definition, which specify the container images and other settings required to run the service.

We add `bin/cfn/service-deploy`:

This script sets up some environment variables, runs cfn-lint to check a CloudFormation template, and then deploys the template to AWS CloudFormation with specific parameters.

>chmod u+x bin/cfn/service-deploy

#### CloudFormation toml

We add `aws/cfn/service/config.toml`:
```sh
[deploy]
bucket = 'cfn-bsharp'
region = 'ca-central-1'
stack_name = 'CrdSrvBackendFlask'
```